# - What are the causes of substance abuse amongst adolesescence using the Biopsychosocial model in contrast to the Evolutionary Model.
## References
## Bittencourt, A. L. P., França, L. G., & Goldim, J. R. (2015). Vulnerable adolescence: bio-psychosocial factors related to drug use. Revista Bioética, 23, 311-319.
The present study contributes to deepen the understanding of specific aspects of the problems faced by adolescents using PAS, such as perception and expression of coercion, voluntariness for the treatment, modality of treatment and readmissions. A cross cut study was performed with all 229 adolescents who were users of PAS ate the CAPSIA in the period from November 2002 to December 2012. Data obtained from the medical records were evaluated quantitatively and descriptively, allowing the characterization of a biopsychosocial profile of these adolescents. Most patients were male (81.7%) and their age at the moment they sought treatment varied from 7 (0.4%) to 17 years (19.2%), with predominance of the age group between 15 (23.6%) and 16 years (24.0%). Analyzing the results based on current debates in bioethics, we tried to present data of patients who entered treatment for the first ten years of operation of the CAPSIA in the city of Santa Cruz do Sul, in Rio Grande do Sul. It is possible to identify marijuana and crack cocaine as the most commonly used drugs among young people who began treatment during the study period. Data about the user - such as being male, having no connection with school, living with family members who use drugs and / or family situations of aggression - were also highlights of the research. 
## Qu, Y., Galván, A., Fuligni, A. J., & Telzer, E. H. (2018). A biopsychosocial approach to examine Mexican American adolescents’ academic achievement and substance use. RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, 4(4), 84-97.
- Taking a comprehensive biopsychosocial approach and using a two-wave longitudinal design, the study examined the relation between brain development and the social environment in Mexican American youth’s (N = 41.56 percent female) academic achievement and substance use. The study found that both Mexican American youth’s structural brain development and social environment uniquely contribute to their adjustment. Specially, smaller hippocampal volume and parental cultural socialization each uniquely predict better academic achievement. Moreover, smaller nucleus accumbens volume and less affiliation with deviant peers each uniquely predict less substance use. These findings underscore the independent contributions of biological and psychosocial factors in youth’s adjustment. The study provides a new biopsychosocial perspective on Mexican American youth’s well-being.
 ## Highland, K. B., Herschl, L. C., Klanecky, A., & McChargue, D. E. (2013). Biopsychosocial pathways to Alcohol‐Related problems. The American journal on addictions, 22(4), 366-372.
 - Drinking to cope has been associated with negative consequences among college students. Less is known about the biopsychosocial pathways that increase the susceptibility to these drinking problems. This study aims to assess the relationship between biopsychosocial variables that have been shown to impact substance-based coping (ie, alexithymia, childhood/adolescent abuse, and genetics). Self-report and genetic [DRD2 genotype (A1− or A1+)] information were collected from 297 participants. Using structural equation models, results found that greater amounts of emotional abuse predicted alexithymia, and substance-based coping predicted drinking problems among both groups. However, among persons with the A1+ allele, greater levels of alexithymia were associated with greater levels of substance-based coping. These results indicate that the A1+ allele may link alexithymia and prior emotional abuse to a higher risk for substance-based coping and subsequent alcohol problems.
## Gerald, M. S., & Higley, J. D. (2002). Evolutionary underpinnings of excessive alcohol consumption. Addiction, 97(4), 415-425.
- Given our close phylogenetic relatedness, non-human primates, in principle, could serve as an ideal model for alcoholism. Indeed, many studies in both humans and rhesus macaques show relationships between excessive alcohol consumption, aggression and serotonergic function, as measured by concentrations of the principal metabolite of serotonin, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). An important behavioral predictor of excessive alcohol consumption in both humans and rhesus monkeys is the propensity toward impulsivity. Integrating behavioral and neuroendocrine data from captive and semi-free-ranging rhesus macaques, we posit that benefits derived from impulsive and aggressive behaviors in some contexts might contribute indirectly to the maintenance of traits involved in alcoholism and excessive alcohol intake.
## Barr, C. S., Schwandt, M. L., Newman, T. K., & Higley, J. D. (2004). The use of adolescent nonhuman primates to model human alcohol intake: neurobiological, genetic, and psychological variables. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1021(1), 221-233.
-Traits characteristic of type I and type II alcoholism are thought to relate to dysregulated central nervous system serotonin functioning.  In the review, it was discussed that variables associated with high adolescent alcohol consumption and other risk-taking behaviors in a nonhuman primate model. Adolescent primates with low CSF concentrations of the serotonin metabolite 5-HIAA are more impulsive and exhibit increased levels of alcohol consumption. Both genetic and environmental factors contribute to alcohol-seeking behavior in adolescent macaques. Sequence variation within serotonin system genes, for example, a repeat polymorphism in the transcriptional control region of the monoamine oxidase gene (MAOA-LPR), increases the propensity for adolescent males to consume alcohol. Environmental factors, such as early life stress in the form of peer-rearing or early age of exposure to alcohol, are also associated with increased alcohol consumption. Peer-reared females, especially those exposed to alcohol during early adolescence, exhibit increased rates of alcohol consumption compared to those exposed to alcohol later in development. 
## Saah T. The evolutionary origins and significance of drug addiction. Harm Reduct J. 2005 Jun 29;2:8. doi: 10.1186/1477-7517-2-8. PMID: 15987511; PMCID: PMC1174878.
- By looking at drug addiction from an evolutionary perspective, we may understand its underlying significance and evaluate its three-fold nature: biology, psychology, and social influences. In this investigation it is important to delve into the co-evolution of mammalian brains and ancient psychotropic plants. Gaining an understanding of the implications of ancient psychotropic substance use in altering mammalian brains will assist in assessing the causes and effects of addiction in a modern-day context. By exploring addiction in this manner, we may move towards more effective treatment early prevention, treating the root of the issue rather than the symptoms.
